蒙恬者，其先齐人也。恬大父蒙骜,自齐事秦昭王,官至上卿。秦庄襄王元年,蒙骜为秦将，伐韩,取成皋、荥阳,作置三川郡。二年,蒙骜攻赵,取三十七城。始皇三年,蒙骜攻韩，取十三城。五年,蒙骜攻魏,取二十城，作置东郡。始皇七年,蒙骜卒。骜子曰武，武子曰恬。恬尝书狱，典文学。始皇二十三年,蒙武为秦裨将军，与王翦攻楚,大破之，杀项燕。二十四年,蒙武攻楚，虏楚王"。蒙恬弟毅。
蒙恬的祖先是齐国人，他的祖父蒙骜从齐国来到秦国为秦昭王服务，官至上卿。秦庄襄王元年，蒙骜作为秦国将领，攻打韩国，夺取成皋、荥阳，设置了三川郡。秦庄襄王二年，蒙骜进攻赵国，攻占了三十七个城邑。秦始皇三年，蒙骜进攻韩国，攻占了十三个城邑。秦始皇五年，蒙骜进入魏国，攻占了二十城，设置了东郡。秦始皇七年，蒙骜去世。蒙骜的儿子叫蒙武，蒙武的儿子叫蒙恬。蒙恬曾学习刑法，掌管刑狱文书。秦始皇二十三年，蒙武任秦国的副将军，与王翦一起进攻楚国，大败楚军，杀死了项燕。秦始皇二十四年，蒙武进攻楚国，俘虏了楚王。蒙恬的弟弟叫蒙毅。
Meng Tian’s ancestors were natives of the state of Qi. Meng Tian’s grandfather, Meng Ao, came from Qi to enter the service of King Zhaoxiang of Qin, advancing to the position of a chief minister. In the first year of the reign of King Zhuangxiang of Qin (250 BC) Meng Ao, acting as a general for Qin, attacked Hann and seized Chenggao and Xingyang, making them into the province of Sanchuan or Three Rivers. In the second year Meng Ao attacked Zhao and seized thirty-seven cities. In the third year of the reign of the First Emperor (244 BC) Meng Ao attacked Hann and seized thirteen cities. In the fifth year (242 BC) he attacked Wei and seized twenty cities, making them into Dong Province. In the seventh year (240 BC) Meng Ao died. Meng Ao’s son was named Wu, and Wu’s son was named Tian. Tian at one time served as a law official and handled legal documents. In the twenty-third year of the First Emperor (224 BC) Meng Wu, acting as an assistant general of Qin, joined Wang Jian in an attack on Chu. They inflicted a major defeat and brought about the death of the Chu leader Xiang Yan. In the twenty-fourth year, Meng Wu attacked Chu and captured the king of Chu. Meng Tian’s younger brother was Meng Yi.

始皇二十六年,蒙恬因家世得为秦将，攻齐，大破之,拜为内史。秦已并天下，乃使蒙恬将三十万众北逐戎狄,收河南。筑长城，因地形，用制险塞，起临洮,至辽东,延袤万余里。于是渡河,据阳山，逶蛇而北。暴师于外十余年,居上郡。是时蒙恬威振匈奴。始皇甚尊宠蒙氏，信任贤之。而亲近蒙毅，位至上卿，出则参乘,入则御前。恬任外事而毅常为内谋，名为忠信，故虽诸将相莫敢与之争焉。
秦始皇二十六年，蒙恬因出身将门，得以充任秦国将领，攻打齐国，大败齐军，被任命为内史。这时，秦国已经统一了天下，便派蒙恬率兵三十万赶走了北方的戎狄，收复了黄河以南的土地。接着就修筑长城，西起临洮，东至辽东，依着地形山势，绵延一万多里，以此控制险要的地方。蒙恬又率领军队，流过黄河，据守阳山，逶迤北行去征讨匈奴。队伍雨雪风霜地在外奔走十多年，最后驻守在上郡。当时蒙恬的声威震撼了匈奴，蒙氏也很受秦始皇的尊宠和信任，被认为是贤能之臣。蒙毅得与皇帝亲近，官至上卿。出行则与皇帝同乘一辆车子，入朝则侍奉在皇帝身边。蒙恬负责外面的事务而蒙毅常在朝中出谋划策。他们号称忠信，致使朝中将相都不敢和他们相争。
In the twenty-sixth year of the First Emperor (221 BC), because of the distinguished service rendered by his family for succeeding generations, Meng Tian was appointed a Qin general. He attacked Qi, inflicting a major defeat, and was honoured with the post of prefect of the capital. Qin, having completed its unification of the empire, dispatched Meng Tian to lead a force of 300,000 men and advance north, expelling the Rong and Di barbarians and taking control of the region south of the bend of the Yellow River. He set about constructing the Great Wall, following the contours of the land and utilizing the narrow defiles to set up frontier posts. The wall began at Lintao and ran east to Liaodong, extending for a distance of over 10,000 li.194 Crossing the Yellow River, it followed the Yang Mountains, twisting and turning as it proceeded north. Meng Tian remained in the field for over ten years, residing in Shang Province. At this time Meng Tian’s might had struck terror into the Xiongnu people. The First Emperor treated the members of the Meng family with extreme favour, trusting them and assigning them to office because of their worth. He was particularly close to Meng Yi, who advanced to the position of a chief minister. Outside the palace, Meng Yi rode in the same carriage as the emperor; at court he stood in the imperial presence. Meng Tian was entrusted with affairs on the foreign front, while Meng Yi constantly took part in the planning of internal affairs, and both enjoyed a reputation for loyalty and good faith. As a result, none of the other generals or high ministers dared to compete with them.

赵高者，诸赵疏远属也。赵高昆弟数人,皆生隐宫,其母被刑缪，世世卑贱。秦王闻高强力,通于狱法，举以为中车府令。高即私事公子胡亥,喻之决狱。高有大罪，秦王令蒙毅法治之。毅不敢阿法,当高罪死，除其宦籍。帝以高之敦于事也,赦之，复其官爵。
赵高是赵国王族的一支亲属。赵高兄弟几人都出生在隐宫。他的母亲受过刑，世代地位低贱。秦始皇听说赵高坚强有力，通晓刑狱之法，便提拔他担任中车府令。赵高便私下勾结公子胡亥，教他判决狱案。赵高犯了大罪，秦始皇让蒙毅依法惩治。蒙毅不敢枉法，判赵高死罪，除了他的官籍。秦始皇因赵高办事勤勉，赦免了他，恢复了他的官爵。
Zhao Gao belonged to a distant branch of the various families of the Zhao surname. He had several younger brothers, all of whom were born in prison, his mother having been condemned to punishment. His family had thus for generations been lowly and humble. The First Emperor, having heard that Zhao Gao was diligent and well versed in legal matters, appointed him as chief of the office of palace carriages. Zhao Gao then entered the private service of Prince Huhai, the emperor’s youngest son, instructing the prince in legal decisions. When Zhao Gao was accused of a major crime, the emperor ordered Meng Yi to settle the case in accordance with the law. Meng Yi, not daring to make an exception in Zhao Gao’s case, recommended that he be condemned to death and removed his name from the roster of officials. But because Zhao Gao was so knowledgeable in the handling of affairs, the emperor pardoned him and restored him to office.

始皇欲游天下，道九原，直抵甘泉,乃使蒙恬通道,自九原抵甘泉，堑山堙谷,千八百里。道未就。
秦始皇想巡游天下，路经九原，直达甘泉。于是派蒙恬开通道路，从九原至甘泉，挖山填谷，长一千八百里，工程没有完成。
The First Emperor was about to set out on a tour of the empire, proceeding through Jiuyuan and going directly to Sweet Springs. He accordingly ordered Meng Tian to construct a road that would run directly from Jiuyuan to Sweet Springs, cutting through mountains and filling in valleys for a distance of 1,800 li. The road had not yet been completed.

始皇三十七年冬,行出游会稽,并海上,北走琅邪。道病，使蒙毅还祷山川,未反。始皇至沙丘崩,秘之，群臣莫知。是时丞相李斯、公子胡亥、中车府令赵高常从。高雅得幸于胡亥四，欲立之，又怨蒙毅法治之而不为己也,因有贼心,乃与丞相李斯、公子胡亥阴谋，立胡亥为太子。太子已立，遣使者以罪赐公子扶苏、蒙恬死。扶苏已死，蒙恬疑而复请之。使者以蒙恬属吏,更置。胡亥以李斯舍人为护军。使者还报，胡亥已闻扶苏死，即欲释蒙恬。赵高恐蒙氏复贵而用事，怨之。
三十七年冬，秦始皇出巡会稽，沿海而上，向北前往琅邪，中途患病，派蒙毅原路返回，祷告山川。蒙毅还没有回来。秦始皇到达沙丘时去世了，消息被封锁，大臣们都不得而知。当时丞相李斯、公子胡亥、中车府令赵高日常随从在秦始皇身边，赵高向来得到胡亥的宠幸，便想拥立胡亥，又怨恨蒙毅曾依法治他罪而不替他开脱，因而萌生了杀机。于是就与丞相李斯、公子胡亥密谋，立胡亥为太子。立太子的事谋定之后，派使者假借罪名要公子扶苏和蒙恬自杀。扶苏死后，蒙恬觉事有可疑，要求问个清楚。使者将蒙恬交给了执法官吏，改押在另一个地方。胡亥派李斯的家臣前去督军。使者回来报告，胡亥听说扶苏死了，就想释放蒙恬。赵高担心蒙氏再度获宠掌握政权而对自己有所怨恨。
In the winter of the thirty-seventh year of Emperor Qin Shi Huang's reign, he went on a tour to Kuaiji; after that, he traveled along the coast and then went north to Langya. On the way, he fell ill and sent Meng Yi back to pray to the mountains and rivers, but Meng Yi had not yet returned when the emperor passed away at Shaqiu—this news was kept secret, and none of the court ministers knew about it. At that time, Prime Minister Li Si, Prince Hu Hai, and Zhao Gao, the director of the Palace Carriage Office, were always accompanying the emperor; Zhao Gao had long been favored by Hu Hai, wanted to help Hu Hai ascend the throne, and also resented Meng Yi (who had once punished him in accordance with the law and refused to show him favor), so he harbored malicious intentions and conspired in secret with Prime Minister Li Si and Prince Hu Hai to make Hu Hai the crown prince. After Hu Hai was established as the crown prince, envoys were sent to grant Prince Fu Su and Meng Tian death on charges of crimes; after Fu Su died, Meng Tian harbored doubts and requested a re-investigation of the case, so the envoys handed Meng Tian over to the government officials and replaced him in his official post, while Hu Hai appointed a retainer of Li Si as the military supervisor. When the envoys returned to report, Hu Hai, having heard of Fu Su's death, intended to release Meng Tian immediately, but Zhao Gao feared that the Meng clan would regain their noble status and hold power again, so he still bore a grudge against them.

毅还至，赵高因为胡亥忠计，欲以灭蒙氏，乃言曰：“臣闻先帝欲举贤立太子久矣，而毅谏曰‘不可'。若知贤而俞弗立，则是不忠而惑主也。以臣愚意，不若诛之。”胡亥听而系蒙毅于代。前已囚蒙恬于阳周。丧至咸阳，已葬，太子立为二世皇帝，而赵高亲近，日夜毁恶蒙氏，求其罪过，举劾之。
蒙毅返回后，赵高借着为胡亥忠心谋划的名义，想消灭蒙氏家族，便进言说：“我听说先帝早就想选拔贤能之人立为太子，可蒙毅却劝谏说‘不行’。他明知您贤能却越发阻挠立您为太子，这是对您不忠，还蒙蔽先帝。依我的浅见，不如杀了他。”胡亥听从了赵高的建议，将蒙毅囚禁在代地。此前，蒙恬已被囚禁在阳周。秦始皇的灵柩运到咸阳，安葬完毕后，太子胡亥即位为二世皇帝，赵高深得亲近，日夜诋毁蒙氏兄弟，搜罗他们的罪过，加以弹劾。
When Meng Yi returned to the capital from his mission, Zhao Gao, pretending to be acting solely out of loyalty to Huhai, set about to wipe out the Meng family. “I have heard that the former emperor had long wanted to promote a man of worth by setting you up as heir apparent,” Zhao Gao said to Huhai. “But Meng Yi remonstrated with him, insisting that it would not do. If Meng Yi knew you were a worthy man but persisted in opposing your appointment, then he acted disloyally and was deliberately misleading the ruler. In my humble opinion, he had best be punished for it!” Huhai, heeding this advice, had Meng Yi seized and put in bonds in Dai. Earlier he had had Meng Tian imprisoned in Yangzhou. By this time the body of the First Emperor had arrived in Xianyang. After the interment, the heir apparent ascended the throne and is known as the Second Emperor. Zhao Gao was constantly by his side, day and night speaking ill of the Meng family, ferreting out their crimes and errors and promoting their impeachment.

子婴进谏曰：“臣闻故赵王迁杀其良臣李牧而用颜聚，燕王喜阴用荆轲之谋而倍秦之约，齐王建杀其故世忠臣而用后胜之议。此三君者，皆各以变古者失其国而殃及其身。今蒙氏，秦之大臣谋士也，而主欲一旦弃去之，臣窃以为不可。臣闻轻虑者不可以治国，独智者不可以存君。诛杀忠臣而立无节行之人，是内使群臣不相信而外使斗士之意离也，臣窃以为不可。”
子婴进言劝谏道：“我听说从前赵王迁杀死他的良臣李牧，改用颜聚；燕王喜暗中采用荆轲的计谋，违背与秦国的盟约；齐王建诛杀世代效忠的大臣，采纳后胜的建议。这三位君主，都因改变旧制而丧失国家，灾祸累及自身。如今蒙氏是秦国的重臣谋士，而陛下却想一下子抛弃他们，我私下认为不可。我听说考虑事情轻率的人不能治理国家，刚愎自用的人不能保全君位。诛杀忠臣而任用没有节操的人，会使朝廷内群臣失去信任，使在外的将士离心离德，我私下认为这样做不可。”
Ziying came forward to remonstrate with the Second Emperor, saying, “I have heard that in past times King Qian of Zhao put to death his loyal minister Li Mu and employed Yan Ju instead, that King Xi of Yan secretly heeded the advice of Jing Ke and broke his promise to the state of Qin, and that King Jian of Qi killed the ministers who had served him loyally for generations and adopted the advice of Hou Sheng. These three rulers, because they changed old ways, all lost their states and brought calamity upon themselves. Now the members of the Meng family are high officials and ministers of planning in Qin. As ruler, you may wish to rid yourself of them all in one morning, but I venture to think such a course is not right. “I have heard that one who is reckless in planning can never govern a nation, and one who considers himself the sole possessor of wisdom can never preserve his ruler. If you put to death loyal ministers and in their place promote men who have done no exemplary deeds, then at home you will create distrust among your officials, and abroad will encourage disaffection in your fighting men. I venture to think that such a course is not right!”

胡亥不听。而遣御史曲宫乘传之代，令蒙毅曰：“先主欲立太子而卿难之。今丞相以卿为不忠，罪及其宗。朕不忍，乃赐卿死，亦甚幸矣。卿其图之！”毅对曰：“以臣不能得先主之意，则臣少宦，顺幸没世，可谓知意矣。以臣不知太子之能，则太子独从，周旋天下，去诸公子绝远，臣无所疑矣。夫先主之举用太子，数年之积也，臣乃何言之敢谏，何虑之敢谋！非敢饰辞以避死也，为羞累先主之名，愿大夫为虑焉，使臣得死情实。且夫顺成全者，道之所贵也；刑杀者，道之所卒也。昔者秦穆公杀三良而死，罪百里奚而非其罪也，故立号曰‘缪’。昭襄王杀武安君白起，楚平王杀伍奢，吴王夫差杀伍子胥，此四君者，皆为大失，而天下非之，以其君为不明，以是籍于诸侯。故曰‘用道治者不杀无罪，而罚不加于无辜’。唯大夫留心！”使者知胡亥之意，不听蒙毅之言，遂杀之。
胡亥不听子婴的劝谏，派御史曲宫乘坐驿车前往代地，对蒙毅下令说：“先帝想立太子，而你从中阻挠。如今丞相认为你不忠，罪过牵连家族。我不忍心那样做，就赐你死，这已是很大的恩惠了。你自己了断吧！”蒙毅回答说：“如果认为我不能领会先帝的心意，可我从年轻时做官，就顺从先帝的旨意而受宠，直到他去世，这说明我是了解他心意的。如果认为我不知太子的贤能，可太子独自跟随先帝周游天下，远超其他公子，我对此毫无疑虑。先帝立太子，是多年深思熟虑的结果，我怎敢进谏什么话、谋划什么呢！我不敢用花言巧语逃避死罪，只是怕连累先帝的名声，希望您考虑一下，让我死得名副其实。况且顺应事理、成全他人，是正道所推崇的；刑罚杀戮，是正道所摒弃的。从前秦穆公杀死三位良臣为自己殉葬，冤枉百里奚而他本无罪，所以谥号为‘缪’。昭襄王杀死武安君白起，楚平王杀死伍奢，吴王夫差杀死伍子胥，这四位君主都犯了大错，天下人谴责他们，认为他们不明智，因此在诸侯中声名狼藉。所以说‘用正道治国的人不杀无罪者，刑罚不施于无辜者’。希望您留意！”使者知道胡亥的意图，不听蒙毅的话，最终杀了他。
Huhai did not listen to this advice, but dispatched the imperial secretary Qu Gong to go by relay carriage to Dai and confront Meng Yi with this order: “The former ruler wanted to appoint me as heir apparent, but you, sir, opposed the move. Now the chancellor considers that you have acted disloyally, and that punishment should extend to the members of your family. As sovereign, I cannot bear to inflict such a penalty, and so I grant you the privilege of taking your own life. This is a mark of extreme favour and I trust you will act accordingly.” Meng Yi replied, “Am I accused of having failed to understand the intentions of the former ruler? But I served him from the time I was young, and continued to enjoy his favour until he passed away, so I had ample opportunity to know his thoughts. Or is it said that I failed to recognize the abilities of the heir apparent? But the heir apparent, alone among all the princes, always accompanied the ruler in his travels about the empire. I therefore had no reason to doubt that he was far superior in ability to the other princes. The former ruler’s plan to raise him to the position of heir apparent must have been one that the ruler had contemplated for a number of years. With what words could I have dared to remonstrate with him, with what proposal of my own could I have ventured to question his plan? “I do not dare employ fine phrases in hopes of avoiding death. It is just that I am ashamed to bring dishonour upon the former ruler’s name. Therefore I ask Your Lordship to consider the matter with care, so that I may be condemned to death on charges that have true substance! “Obedient service that insures long life — this is what the Way prizes; but punishing and killing — this is the end of the Way! In past times Duke Mu of Qin put to death three good ministers and accused Baili Xi of a crime worthy of execution, though the latter was guiltless. Therefore he was given the posthumous title Mu or ‘Mistaken’. King Zhaoxiang of Qin put to death Bai Qi, Lord Wuan; King Ping of Chu put to death Wu She; and King Fuchai of Wu put to death Wu Zixu. These four rulers all committed grave errors, and the world condemned them for it. As rulers they were thought to lack understanding, and the other feudal lords noted this in their records. Therefore it is said: ‘One who governs by the Way does not put to death the guiltless or inflict punishment on those without blame.’ I hope Your Lordship will give thought to the matter!” The imperial secretary, however, knew what Huhai wanted and so, without heeding these words of Meng Yi, he had him put to death.

二世又遣使者之阳周，令蒙恬曰：“君之过多矣，而卿弟毅有大罪，法及内史。”恬曰：“自吾先人，及至子孙，积功信于秦三世矣。今臣将兵三十余万，身虽囚系，其势足以倍畔，然自知必死而守义者，不敢辱先人之教，以不忘先主也。昔周成王初立，未离襁褓，周公旦负王以朝，卒定天下。及成王有病甚殆，公旦自撤其爪以沉于河，曰：‘王未有识，是旦执事。有罪殃，旦受其不祥。’乃书而藏之记府，可谓信矣。及王能治国，有贼臣言：‘周公旦欲为乱久矣，王若不备，必有大事。’王乃大怒，周公旦走而奔于楚。成王观于记府，得周公旦沉书，乃流涕曰：‘孰谓周公旦欲为乱乎！’杀言之者而反周公旦。故《周书》曰‘必参而伍之’。今恬之宗，世无二心，而事卒如此，是必孽臣逆乱，内陵之道也。夫成王失而复振则卒昌；桀杀关龙逢，纣杀王子比干而不悔，身死则国亡。臣故曰‘过可振而谏可觉’也。察于参伍，上圣之法也。凡臣之言，非以求免于咎也，将以谏而死，愿陛下为万民思从道也。”使者曰：“臣受诏行法于将军，不敢以将军言闻于上也。”蒙恬喟然太息曰：“我何罪于天，无过而死乎？”良久，徐曰：“恬罪固当死矣。起临洮属之辽东，城堑万余里，此其中不能无绝地脉，此乃恬之罪也。”乃吞药自杀。
秦二世又派使者前往阳周，对蒙恬下令说：“您的罪过够多了，而您的弟弟蒙毅犯有大罪，依法牵连到您。”蒙恬说：“从我祖父到子孙，在秦国积累功劳和信义已有三代。如今我统领三十多万军队，虽被囚禁，势力仍足以反叛，但我明知必死却坚守道义，是因不敢辱没先人的教诲，不忘先帝的恩德。从前周成王刚即位时，还在襁褓中，周公旦背着他上朝，最终平定天下。成王病重时，周公旦剪下自己的指甲沉入黄河，说：‘君王年幼无知，由我执政。若有罪过灾祸，我来承受。’并将此事记录下来藏入府库，可见其忠诚。成王长大后能治理国家，有奸臣说：‘周公旦早想作乱，大王若不防备，定会出大事。’成王大怒，周公旦逃到楚国。后来成王在府库中看到周公旦的祷词记录，流泪说：‘谁说周公旦想作乱！’于是杀了进谗言的人，召回周公旦。因此《周书》说‘必须多方验证考察’。如今我家族世代忠心，事情却到这地步，定是奸臣叛乱、欺君罔上所致。成王犯错后改正，周朝最终昌盛；夏桀杀关龙逢、商纣杀王子比干却不知悔改，最终身死国亡。因此我说‘过错可改正，劝谏能让人醒悟’。多方考察是圣君的治国之道。我所说的话，并非求免罪，而是想以死进谏，希望陛下为万民着想，遵循正道。”使者说：“我受诏对将军执行法令，不敢将您的话上报皇上。”蒙恬长叹道：“我对上天有何罪过，要无罪而死呢？”过了很久，缓缓说：“我的罪过确实该死。从临洮到辽东，修筑长城、挖掘壕沟万余里，其间难免切断地脉，这就是我的罪过。”于是吞药自杀。
The Second Emperor also sent an envoy to Yangzhou with an order to Meng Tian that read: “Your errors are many, and your younger brother Yi has committed serious crimes. Under the law, you are implicated as well.” Meng Tian replied, “From my grandfather down to his sons and grandsons, my family has accumulated merit and enjoyed trust with Qin for three generations. I have been put in command of over 300,000 troops, and though I am bound and imprisoned, I have power enough to carry out a revolt. But, although I know it means death, I have abided by the principles of righteousness because I would not dare to disgrace the teachings of my forbears, and because I cannot forget my debt to the former emperor. “In ancient times, when King Cheng of the Zhou dynasty was first made ruler, he was still a babe in swaddling clothes. His uncle, Dan, the Duke of Zhou, carried the infant king on his back when he attended court, and so peace was brought to the empire. Later, King Cheng fell gravely ill and his life was in danger. The Duke of Zhou pared his fingernails and threw the parings into the Yellow River, saying, ‘The king as yet has no understanding of state affairs; I alone am handling them. If there is some fault, I alone should suffer the ill effects.’ Then he made a record of what he had done and stored it away in the archives. He acted, one may say, in complete good faith. “Later, when the king grew old enough to govern the nation, evil ministers asserted that the Duke of Zhou had long been plotting revolt. If the king did not take precautions, they warned, the results would surely be calamitous. “The king was enraged at these words, and the Duke of Zhou fled from the kingdom and took refuge in Chu. But when King Cheng examined the archives, he found the document recording the words the Duke of Zhou spoke when he threw the parings into the river. Tears streaming from his eyes, he said, ‘Who tells me that the Duke of Zhou is plotting revolt!’ He put to death those who had spoken so and recalled the Duke of Zhou. Therefore the Book of Zhou says: ‘One must know the threes and fives.’ “My family has served without duplicity for generations. If affairs have come to this, it must be because nefarious ministers are plotting treason and attempting to usurp power from within. King Cheng committed an error, but he remedied it and hence in the end was able to flourish. But Emperor Jie killed Guan Longfeng and Emperor Zhou killed Prince Bi Gan and neither ever repented; so they brought death on themselves and the downfall of their kingdom. Therefore I say, ‘Faults can be remedied, remonstrance can bring understanding.’ To examine the threes and fives is the method employed by the sages of antiquity. I say all these things not because I hope to escape censure, but because I wish my death to be a remonstrance. I beg that Your Majesty will give thought for the 10,000 people and abide by the Way.” But the envoy said, “I have received an imperial decree to carry out the law, General. I cannot presume to relay your words to the sovereign.” Meng Tian gave a deep sigh and said, “What crime have I committed before Heaven that I should die an innocent death?” Then after a long while he said in a grave manner, “In fact I deserve to die for the crime I have committed. From Lintao east to Liaodong I built a wall extending for 10,000 li and more. In the course of it, I could not help but cut through the arteries of the earth. That must be my crime!” Then he swallowed the poison and died.

太史公曰：吾适北边,自直道归,行观蒙恬所为秦筑长城亭障,堑山堙谷,通直道，固轻百姓力矣。夫秦之初灭诸侯，天下之心未定，痍伤者未瘳,而恬为名将，不以此时强谏，振百姓之急，养老存孤,务修众庶之和,而阿意兴功,此其兄弟遇诛，不亦宜乎?何乃罪地脉哉?
太史公说：我到过北方的边防前线，经由九原至甘泉的直道返回，沿路看到蒙恬为秦所修的长城堡垒，挖山填谷，开通直道，本来就是过分耗费百姓的劳力的事。秦刚刚灭了诸侯，天下人心没有安定，受伤者没有痊愈，而蒙恬身为名将，不在此时极力劝谏，救百姓的急难，供养老人，抚育孤儿，致力于建设百姓的和平生活，却迎合秦始皇的心意大兴劳作，这样看来，他们兄弟遭到诛杀，不是应当的吗?为什么竟归罪于切断地脉呢?
The Grand Historian remarks: Lü Buwei and Lao Ai were both honoured with fiefs, the former receiving the title of marquis of Wenxin. When accusations were first made against Lao Ai, Lao got word of it. The king of Qin questioned those about him as to the truth of the charges but had not yet uncovered any definite evidence when he set off for Yong to perform the suburban sacrifice. Lao Ai, fearful that calamity was about to befall him, plotted with the members of his clique and, using the queen dowager’s seal of authority without her permission, called out troops and initiated a revolt in the Qinian Palace. The king dispatched officers to attack Lao Ai’s forces and Lao Ai fled in defeat. He was pursued and cut down at Haozhi, and eventually his whole clan was wiped out. This marked the beginning of Lü Buwei’s fall from power. What Confucius said about the “man of fame” might well apply to this Master Lü, might it not?