白起者，郿人也。善用兵，事秦昭王。昭王十三年,而白起为左庶长,将而击韩之新城。是岁，穰侯相秦,举任鄙以为汉中守。其明年,白起为左更,攻韩、魏于伊阙四，斩首二十四万，又虏其将公孙喜，拔五城。起迁为国尉。涉河,取韩安邑以东至乾河。明年,白起为大良造。攻魏，拔之,取城小大六十一。明年,起与客卿错攻垣城”,拔之。后五年,白起攻赵，拔光狼城。后七年,白起攻楚，拔鄢、邓五城。其明年,攻楚，拔郢，烧夷陵,遂东至竟陵。楚王亡去郢，东走徙陈。秦以郢为南郡。白起迁为武安君。武安君因取楚，定巫、黔中郡。昭王三十四年,白起攻魏，拔华阳，走芒卯，而虏三晋将,斩首十三万。与赵将贾偃战，沉其卒二万人于河中。昭王四十三年,白起攻韩陉城，拔五城,斩首五万。四十四年,白起攻南阳太行道,绝之。
白起是陕西郿县人，很会用兵，在秦昭王驾下供职。昭王十三年，白起为左庶长，曾带兵攻打韩国的新城。这一年，正好是穰侯魏冉做秦国的宰相，他推荐任鄙做了汉中的郡守。第二年，白起升为左更，率兵攻打伊阙，与韩、魏联军作战，杀死了敌兵二十四万，活捉了魏将公孙喜，占领了五座城池，白起因功又被升为国尉。接着他又指挥秦军渡过黄河，夺取了安邑以东直到乾河一带的韩国的大片土地。转过年来，白起做了大良造，领兵进攻魏国，攻克了大小城邑六十一个。第二年，白起又和客卿司马错一起打下了垣城。五年后，白起又攻打赵国，夺取了赵国的光狼城。又过了七年，白起攻打楚国，又攻下了鄢、邓等五座城池。秦昭王二十九年，又再次攻楚，占领了楚国的郢都，烧毁了楚国祖先的陵墓，并长驱东下，一直打到了竟陵，楚王被迫离开郢都，向东逃难，把国都也迁到了陈县。而秦国就把郢都变成了它的南郡，白起因此被封为武安君。接着白起又连续作战，占领了楚国西部的巫山和黔中两个郡。昭王三十四年，白起伐魏，攻克了华阳，赶走了芒卯，俘虏了三个将领，杀死魏兵十三万。接着又打败了赵将贾偃，把赵国的两万多降兵扔在了黄河里。昭王四十三年，白起首先进攻韩国的陉城，接着一连夺取了韩国的五座城镇，杀死敌兵五万人。四十四年，白起攻占了韩国南阳的太行山路，截断了太行山的交通。
Bai Qi was a native of Mei in Qin. Being skilled in the use of arms, he served under King Zhaoxiang of Qin. In King Zhaoxiang’s thirteenth year (294 BC) Bai Qi was given the rank of zuoshuzhang, appointed a general, and sent to make a surprise attack on Hann’s city of Xincheng. This year the marquis of Rang became prime minister of Qin and appointed Ren Bi to be governor of Hanzhong The following year Bai Qi was promoted to the rank of zuogeng and attacked the Hann and Wei forces at Yique, cutting off 240,000 enemy heads. He also took prisoner the enemy leader Gongsun Xi and captured five cities. Bai Qi was transferred to the post of state commandant and, crossing the Yellow River, seized the area from Anyi east to Ganhe. The following year Bai Qi was given the rank of daliangzao. He attacked Wei, defeating it, and seized sixty-one cities of various sizes. The following year he and Sima Cuo, a “guest minister” of Qin, attacked the city of Yuan and captured it. Five years later, Bai Qi attacked Zhao and captured the city of Guanglang. Seven years later he attacked Chu and captured five cities, including Yan and Deng. The following year he attacked Chu and captured the Chu capital city Ying, burned Yiling, and pushed east as far as Jingling. The king of Chu, abandoning his capital, left Ying and fled east to take up residence in Chen. Qin then made Ying into Nan Province and promoted Bai Qi to the position of Lord Wuan. Bai Qi went on to gain control of Chu and bring order to the provinces of Wu and Qianzhong.King Zhaoxiang, thirty-fourth year (273 BC): Bai Qi attacked Wei and captured Huyang, routing Mang Mao, capturing one of the Three Jin generals, and cutting off 130,000 enemy heads. He engaged the Zhao general Jia Yan in battle, at which time 20,000 of Zhao’s men were drowned in the Yellow River. King Zhaoxiang, forty-third year (264 BC): Bai Qi attacked the Hann city of Jing, captured five cities, and cut off 50,000 enemy heads. Forty-fourth year (263 BC): Bai Qi attacked Nanyang and cut off the road leading to Taihang.

四十五年,伐韩之野王。野王降秦，上党道绝。其守冯亭与民谋曰:“郑道已绝,韩必不可得为民。秦兵日进，韩不能应,不如以上党归赵。赵若受我，秦怒，必攻赵。赵被兵，必亲韩。韩赵为一，则可以当秦。”因使人报赵。赵孝成王与平阳君、平原君计之。平阳君曰：“不如勿受。受之，祸大于所得。”平原君曰：“无故得一郡，受之便。”赵受之，因封冯亭为华阳君。
四十五年，白起攻打韩国的野王郡，野王投降了秦国，从而使得韩国的上党地区与其本国断绝了联系。这时上党郡的郡守冯亭和当地的人们商量说：“现在我们与国都新郑的交通已被掐断，韩国已经不能再管我们了。秦兵现在一天天逼进，韩国无法接应我们，我想我们不如带着整个上党地区投奔赵国。赵国假如接纳了我们，秦国一定会发怒伐赵。赵国受到攻击，一定会和韩国联合。到那时韩国和赵国团结一致，就可以抵抗秦国了。”议罢就赶紧派人向赵国报告了这个意向。赵孝成王与平阳君、平原君一起商讨。平阳君说：“还是不要接受的好，如果接受了，恐怕大祸临头得不偿失。”平原君说：“白白地得到一个郡，还是接受为好!"于是赵王决定接受了，封冯亭为华阳君。
King Zhaoxiang, forty-fifth year (262 BC): Qin attacked the region of Yewang in Hann. Yewang surrendered to Qin, thus cutting off the road to Shangdang. Feng Ting, the governor of Shangdang, consulted with his people, saying, “The road to the capital area of Zheng is cut off and you can no longer expect to be treated as people of Hann. The Qin forces press forward day by day and Hann is powerless to withstand them. The best thing would be to turn Shangdang over to the state of Zhao. If Zhao accepts us, Qin in its anger will surely attack Zhao. And if Zhao is faced with attack, it will be certain to ally with Hann. Once Hann and Zhao are united, then they can face up to Qin!” He accordingly sent a man to report his decision to Zhao. King Xiaocheng of Zhao consulted with Lord Pingyang and Lord Pingyuan.141 Lord Pingyang said, “Better not accept the offer. If we accept, the headaches will outweigh the gain.” But Lord Pingyuan said, “With no effort on our part we acquire a province — surely we should accept!” Zhao accepted the offer and enfeoffed Feng Ting as Lord Huayang.

四十六年,秦攻韩缑氏、蔺,拔之。四十七年,秦使左庶长王龁攻韩,取上党。上党民走赵。赵军长平,以按据上党民。四月，龁因攻赵。赵使廉颇将。赵军士卒犯秦斥兵,秦斥兵斩赵裨将茄。六月，陷赵军，取二障四尉四。七月，赵军筑垒壁而守之。秦又攻其垒，取二尉，败其阵，夺西垒壁。廉颇坚壁以待秦，秦数挑战，赵兵不出。赵王数以为让。而秦相应侯又使人行千金于赵为反间,曰：“秦之所恶,独畏马服子赵括将耳,廉颇易与，且降矣。”赵王既怒廉颇军多失亡，军数败，又反坚壁不敢战，而又闻秦反间之言，因使赵括代廉颇将以击秦。秦闻马服子将，乃阴使武安君白起为上将军，而王龁为尉裨将，令军中有敢泄武安君将者斩。赵括至，则出兵击秦军。秦军详败而走，张二奇兵以劫之。赵军逐胜,追造秦壁。壁坚拒不得入，而秦奇兵二万五千人绝赵军后，又一军五千骑绝赵壁间,赵军分而为二，粮道绝。而秦出轻兵击之。赵战不利，因筑壁坚守，以待救至。秦王闻赵食道绝，王自之河内,赐民爵各一级,发年十五以上悉诣长平,遮绝赵救及粮食。
昭王四十六年，秦国又攻下了韩国的缑氏和蔺县。四十七年，秦王派左庶长王龁进攻韩国，占领了上党。上党的军民都向赵国逃跑。这时赵国的军队驻扎在长平，成为上党军民的依靠。四月，王龁向赵国展开进攻，当时赵国是派廉颇在指挥长平的军队。赵军先和秦国的侦察部队一交锋，就被秦国的侦察部队杀掉了副将赵茄。六月，秦军攻破了赵国的防线，夺去了两个城堡，抓去了四个校尉。七月，赵军在加筑工事坚守防线的过程中，又遭到了秦军的攻击，被捉去了两个校尉，阵线又被攻破，西部的一部分堡垒被秦兵占领。于是廉颇遂命令赵军坚守阵地，不再出战，以等待时机。秦军多次挑战，赵军都一概不应。这时赵王沉不住气了，多次地派人指责廉颇。而秦国宰相应侯范雎也趁机派人带着千金到赵国来行使反间计，他们说：“秦国人最怕的，就是赵奢的儿子赵括一个，至于廉颇，那是容易对付的，他马上就要投降了。"这时赵王本来就对廉颇的损兵折将、屡次失败，以及他坚壁固守不敢出战的情形不满意，现在又听到秦国散布的流言后，便立刻派了赵括去代替廉颇。秦国一听赵括做了赵军的主帅，于是就暗中换了武安君白起来做上将军，而让王龁改任副将，并命令全军谁敢泄漏白起为主将的消息，谁就要被杀头。再说赵括一到长平，就立即出兵与秦军作战。而秦国的军队就故意地假装失败逃跑，暗中却派了两支奇兵准备着截断赵军的后路。这时赵军乘胜猛追，一直追到了秦军的工事前面。秦军的工事非常坚固，赵军攻不进去，趁这时秦国预先埋伏的两万五千人已经截断了赵军的退路，另一支五千人的骑兵又插入了赵军的营垒，把赵军截为两段，赵国的粮道也不通了。接着秦军就派小部队对赵军不断出击，赵军连连失利，最后无法，只好坚守工事，等待救兵了。秦王一听赵军的运输线已经断绝，于是自己就亲临河内，下令给秦国的百姓们每人提高一级爵位，征调国内所有十五岁以上男子全去长平，以断绝赵国对长平的一切援救和粮草供应。
Forty-sixth year (261 BC): Qin attacked the Hann cities of Goushi and Lin and captured them. Forty-seventh year (260 BC): Qin dispatched the zuoshuzhang Wang He to attack Hann. He seized Shangdang, whereupon the inhabitants of Shangdang fled to Zhao. The Zhao army encamped at Changping in order to take charge of the refugees from Shangdang. In the fourth month Wang He launched his attack on Zhao. Zhao appointed Lian Po as commander of its forces. When the soldiers of the Zhao army clashed with the Qin scouting forces, the Qin scouts cut down the Zhao assistant general Jia. In the sixth month Qin gained momentary advantage over the Zhao army and seized two of its outposts and four commanders. Seventh month: the Zhao army constructed walled fortifications and guarded its position. Qin attacked the fortifications, captured two commanders, and broke through the Zhao ranks, seizing the western section of the walled fortifications. Lian Po strengthened his walls and waited for Qin to attack. Qin repeatedly challenged Lian Po to battle, but the Zhao forces refused to venture out of their fortifications, though the king of Zhao several times berated Lian Po. Meanwhile the Qin prime minister, the marquis of Ying, sent men to use large sums of money in spreading rumours among the people of Zhao, saying, “All Qin is afraid of is that Zhao Kuo, the son of Lord Mafu, may take commands. Lian Po is easy to deal with and will soon surrender.” The king of Zhao was already angry at Lian Po’s army because of its many failures and frequent defeats, and now he saw that it held fast to its defence works and did not dare to fight, and he had also heard the rumours that Qin had spread abroad. He accordingly ordered Zhao Kuo to replace Lian Po as commander and to lead a strike against Qin. When Qin heard that Zhao Kuo, the son of Lord Mafu, had taken command, it appointed Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, to be supreme commander of the army, with Wang He as assistant general, and circulated an order throughout the army that anyone daring to reveal that Lord Wuan was in command would be cut in two. When Zhao Kuo arrived to take over, he sent out his troops in a surprise attack on the Qin army. The Qin army, feigning defeat, raced from the field, leaving two lines of ambush troops ready to fall on the enemy. The Zhao army, following up its supposed victory, pursued the enemy as far as the Qin fortifications, where the defenders of the fortifications drove them back and prevented them from gaining entrance. Then the Qin ambush forces, numbering 25,000 men, cut off the rear of the Zhao army, while another division of 5,000 cavalry sealed off the Zhao fortifications. Thus the Zhao army was split into two parts and its supply lines were cut off. Qin then dispatched lightly armed men to make sudden strikes. The Zhao forces, realizing they could not win in combat, built more fortifications and held tight to their position, awaiting the arrival of reinforcements. When the king of Qin received word that Zhao’s food supply had been cut off, he journeyed in person to the Henei region, where he bestowed one grade of noble rank on the population and called up all males over fifteen years of age and sent them to Changping to block Zhao’s relief forces and food supplies.

至九月，赵卒不得食四十六日，皆内阴相杀食。来攻秦垒，欲出。为四队,四五复之,不能出。其将军赵括出锐卒自搏战，秦军射杀赵括。括军败，卒四十万人降武安君。武安君计曰:“前秦已拔上党，上党民不乐为秦而归赵，赵卒反覆。非尽杀之，恐为乱。”乃挟诈而尽坑杀之,遗其小者二百四十人归赵。前后斩首虏四十五万人。赵人大震。
到九月时，赵国的军营里已经绝粮四十六天了，士兵们以至于到了暗中互相残杀吃人肉的地步。他们实在无法再等了，只好又改为对秦军出击，想要突围。赵括把赵卒分为四队，轮番向外突了四五回，结果都被打了回去。最后赵括带着一部分精锐部队亲自出战，结果被秦军射死了，于是赵军大败，四十多万人都投降了白起。白起考虑道：“前者秦军夺取上党时，上党的军民们就不愿意归顺秦国而归了赵国，赵国人也是反复无常的，要不全部杀了他们，恐怕日后还要闹乱子。”于是就设计把他们全都活埋了，只留下了其中的二百四十个小孩子让他们回去向赵国报讯。这一仗前后共杀死赵人四十五万，使赵国举国为之震惊。
By the time the ninth month arrived, the Zhao soldiers had had no food for forty-six days and many were secretly killing and eating their comrades. Forming themselves in four battalions, they attacked the Qin fortifications four or five times, attempting to break out of the encirclement, but could not do so. The Zhao army commander Zhao Kuo called out his finest men and led them into combat, but the Qin army shot and killed him with arrows. Thus Zhao Kuo was defeated, and 400,000 of his soldiers surrendered to Lord Wuan. Lord Wuan recalled that earlier, when Qin had captured the region of Shangdang, the inhabitants of Shangdang, unhappy at the thought of becoming Qin subjects, had gone over to the side of Zhao. He calculated, therefore, that since the Zhao troops might well turn against him, he would face the danger of revolt if he did not kill them all. He consequently devised some deception and had them all massacred, sending only 240 of the youngest ones back to Zhao. Counting earlier and later actions, he took prisoner or cut off the heads of 450,000 men, leaving the people of Zhao trembling with fear.

四十八年十月,秦复定上党郡。秦分军为二:王龁攻皮牢,拔之；司马梗定太原。韩、赵恐，使苏代厚币说秦相应侯曰:“武安君禽马服子乎?”曰：“然。”又曰：“即围邯郸乎?”曰：“然。”“赵亡则秦王王矣,武安君为三公。武安君所为秦战胜攻取者七十余城，南定鄢、郢、汉中,北禽赵括之军，虽周、召、吕望之功不益于此矣。今赵亡，秦王王，则武安君必为三公，君能为之下乎?虽无欲为之下，固不得已矣。秦尝攻韩，围邢丘,困上党，上党之民皆反为赵，天下不乐为秦民之日久矣。今亡赵，北地入燕，东地入齐，南地入韩、魏，则君之所得亡几何。故不如因而割之,无以为武安君功也。”于是应侯言于秦王曰：“秦兵劳，请许韩、赵之割地以和，且休士卒。”王听之，割韩垣雍、赵六城以和。正月，皆罢兵。武安君闻之，由是与应侯有隙。
四十八年十月，秦军全部平定了上党郡，然后分兵两路：王龁率军西下攻克了皮牢；司马梗率军北上攻下了太原。韩国、赵国都感到害怕了，于是就派苏代带着重礼到秦国来贿赂其宰相范雎说：“武安君不是消灭赵括了吗?”范雎说：“是的。”苏代又说：“秦军不是马上就要包围邯郸了吗?”范雎说：“是的。”苏代说：“赵国一旦灭亡，秦王就可以称帝了，那时武安君必将成为国家的三公。他为秦国打败敌人夺取了七十多个城池，他向南平定了鄢、郢、汉中，向北消灭了赵括的军队，就是古代周公、召公、吕望的功劳恐怕也不会比这个更多了。假如赵国真的灭亡，秦国一称帝，武安君真的成了三公，您能甘愿屈居于他之下吗?到那时恐怕您不想屈居于他之下，也不行了吧。当初秦国攻韩，包围了邢丘、控制了上党的时候，上党的军民都去投奔了赵国，这说明普天下的人早就不乐意做秦国的臣民。现在您即使消灭了赵国，赵国北部的地盘会落入燕国之手，东部的地盘会落入齐国之手，南部的地盘会落入韩国和魏国之手，这样一来你们自己根本得不到多少地盘。所以我觉得您应该叫赵国割地求和，而不要灭赵再给武安君增功。”范雎一听就去对秦王说：“秦国的士兵已经很疲劳了，请允许韩国和赵国割地求和，让我们的士兵们休整一下吧。”秦王同意了，于是韩国割出了垣雍县，赵国也割出了六座城，都与秦国讲和了。正月，秦军全部撤回。武安君听说了这是范雎的主意，从此就和范雎有了矛盾。
Forty-eighth year (259 BC), tenth month: Qin once more sent forces to restore order in the province of Shangdang. It divided its army into two, Wang He attacking and capturing Pilao and Sima Geng restoring order to Taiyuan. Hann and Zhao in alarm sent Su Dai to go with lavish gifts and speak to the prime minister of Qin, the marquis of Ying. “Has Lord Wuan taken captive the son of Lord Mafu?” asked Su Dai. “He has,” said the marquis. “And is he now besieging the Zhao capital city of Handan?” “He is.” “If Zhao is destroyed, then the king of Qin will be king of that area as well, and Lord Wuan will become one of the three highest ministers of the state. On Qin’s behalf Lord Wuan has won victories, attacking and seizing over seventy cities. In the south he has gained control of Yan, Ying, and Hanzhong, and in the north he has taken prisoner the army of Zhao Kuo. Even the achievements of the Duke of Zhou, the Duke of Shao, and Lü Wang, the three highest ministers of the Zhou dynasty, could not top this! Now if Zhao is destroyed, Qin will be its king, and if Qin is its king, then Lord Wuan is certain to become one of the three highest ministers. Can you bear to be subordinate to him? Indeed, whether you wish it or not, you will have no choice! “In the past, when Qin attacked Hann and besieged the city of Xingqiu, it placed Shangdang in a difficult position. But the people of Shangdang all chose to put themselves under Zhao’s rule. For many long days the world has been unhappy at the thought of becoming subjects of Qin! So now if you destroy Zhao, its northern regions will go over to Yan, its eastern regions to Qi, its southern regions to Hann and Wei, and then how many people will you have won in the action? Therefore you would do best to settle for a concession of land rather than merely adding to the achievements of Lord Wuan!” The marquis of Ying accordingly spoke to the king of Qin, saying, “Qin’s soldiers are worn out. I beg permission to make peace with Hann and Zhao in exchange for territorial concessions so we can rest our men.” The king gave his permission, and the Hann region of Yuanyong and six cities of Zhao were ceded to Qin in exchange for peace. In the first month, all Qin troops were withdrawn. When Lord Wuan received the order, it became the start of bad feeling between him and the marquis of Ying.

其九月，秦复发兵，使五大夫王陵攻赵邯郸。是时武安君病，不任行。四十九年正月,陵攻邯郸，少利，秦益发兵佐陵。陵兵亡五校。武安君病愈，秦王欲使武安君代陵将。武安君言曰：“邯郸实未易攻也。且诸侯救日至，彼诸侯怨秦之日久矣。今秦虽破长平军，而秦卒死者过半，国内空。远绝河山而争人国都,赵应其内，诸侯攻其外，破秦军必矣。不可。”秦王自命不行，乃使应侯请之，武安君终辞不肯行，遂称病。
同年九月，秦国又派五大夫王陵率兵攻打赵国的邯郸。这时正赶上白起有病，不能担当任务。四十九年正月，王陵在攻打邯郸中进展不太顺利，于是秦王又增派了一些部队支援王陵，但王陵还是失败了，损失了五个校尉的人马。这时白起的病已经好了，秦王就想让他去代替王陵为将。白起推辞说：“邯郸实在是不易攻克的。而且其他各国的救兵也很快就要到了，各个国家都是很早以来就对秦国不满。现在我们虽然在长平消灭了赵国的军队，但是我们自己的士兵也死伤过半，国内空虚。现在再跨山涉水地去打人家的国都，这样，赵国的军队从里向外扑，各国的军队从外向里打，那时，秦军是一定要被打败的。还是不要打了吧!”秦王一看自己说白起不听，就又派范雎去请他，武安君始终推辞不去，后来就又说自己病了。
In the ninth month Qin once more called out its troops, ordering fifth rank counsellor Wang Ling to attack the Zhao capital city of Handan. At this time Lord Wuan was ill and could not undertake the journey. Forty-ninth year (258 BC), first month: Wang Ling attacked Handan and won a slight advantage. Qin called out more troops to assist him. Wang Ling lost five companies of men. Lord Wuan’s illness abated. The king of Qin wanted to send Lord Wuan to replace Wang Ling as commander. But Lord Wuan said, “Handan is in fact not easy to attack, and relief forces from the other feudal rulers will be arriving any day. The other rulers have for a long time borne great hatred toward Qin. Now, although Qin has destroyed the enemy army at Changping, over half of its own men have died in the action and the country’s resources are exhausted. We have embarked on a distant expedition beyond the Yellow River and the mountains, hoping to wrest control of another country’s capital. But if Zhao rallies its forces from within, while the other rulers attack from without, Qin’s army is certain to be defeated. This will not do!” The king of Qin personally ordered Lord Wuan to accept command, but when this had no effect, he sent the marquis of Ying to make a polite request. But Lord Wuan persisted in his refusal, unwilling to undertake the mission, and finally pleaded illness. The king of Qin then ordered Wang He to replace Wang Ling as commander.

秦王使王龁代陵将，八九月围邯郸,不能拔。楚使春申君及魏公子将兵数十万攻秦军,秦军多失亡。武安君言曰：“秦不听臣计，今如何矣!”秦王闻之，怒，强起武安君,武安君遂称病笃。应侯请之，不起。于是免武安君为士伍,迁之阴密。武安君病，未能行。居三月，诸侯攻秦军急，秦军数却,使者日至。秦王乃使人遣白起，不得留咸阳中。武安君既行，出咸阳西门十里，至杜邮。秦昭王与应侯群臣议曰：“白起之迁，其意尚怏快不服,有余言。”秦王乃使使者赐之剑，自裁。武安君引剑将自刭，曰：“我何罪于天而至此哉?”良久，曰：“我固当死。长平之战，赵卒降者数十万人，我诈而尽坑之，是足以死。”遂自杀。武安君之死也，以秦昭王五十年十一月。死而非其罪，秦人怜之，乡邑皆祭祀焉。
秦王无法，只好改派玉龁去替代了王陵。王龁率军将邯郸围困了九个月，也没能攻下来。这时楚国的春申君和魏国的魏公子率领着几十万大军救赵攻秦，秦军伤亡很大。这时武安君在私下议论说：“秦王当初不听我的话，现在事实怎么样呢?”秦王一听很生气，就硬是催促武安君赴前线就任。武安君推说病重，范雎也再次往请，白起还是不干。于是秦王一怒免掉了白起武安君的封号，将他削为平民，下令把他发配到阴密去住。白起因为有病，暂时没有动身。又过了三个月，这时各国的军队对秦军攻逼得很厉害，秦军连续败退，告急的使者每天都有。面对这种局势，秦王就派人打发白起立刻动身，不准再住在咸阳。白起只好出发了，当他出了咸阳西门，走到离城十里地的杜邮时，秦昭王与范雎等人商量说：“白起对于这次流放，他是耿耿于怀的，他还憋着一肚子对朝廷不满的话。”于是就派人给他送去了一把剑，叫他自杀。白起接过剑来恨恨地说：“我究竟有什么罪过而落到这个地步?”过了一会，他自己又说：“我是该死的。在长平之战中，赵国的几十万人投降了我，我却一下子把他们都活埋了，有这一条，我早就该死了。”说罢遂横剑自杀。白起是死在秦昭王五十年十一月。因为他是无罪被杀，所以秦国人都很同情他，许多乡村城镇都给他上供。
The Qin forces besieged the city for eight or nine months but could not capture it. Meanwhile Chu ordered Lord Chunshen and the Wei ducal son Wuji to lead a force of several tens of thousands of men and attack the Qin army, which suffered large losses. Lord Wuan said, “Qin would not heed my counsel, and now see what happens!” When the king of Qin heard of the remark, he was furious and tried to force Lord Wuan to return to active duty, but Lord Wuan insisted that his illness was too grave. He likewise refused when the marquis of Ying repeated his earlier request. Lord Wuan was forthwith stripped of all honours, reduced to the rank of a common soldier, and ordered into exile in Yinmi, but being ill, he could not undertake the trip. By the time the third month arrived, the other feudal rulers were pressing their attack on the Qin army, which was several times forced to fall back. Messengers arrived daily in the Qin capital. The king of Qin sent men to expel Bai Qi from the capital, saying he was not permitted to remain in Xianyang any longer. He finally set out, leaving by the west gate of Xianyang and proceeding ten li until he reached Duyou. King Zhaoxiang, after deliberating with the marquis of Ying and the other officials, said, “When Bai Qi set off for exile, he was still disgruntled and unsubmissive in attitude and offered complaints!” The king thereupon dispatched a messenger to present Bai Qi with a sword and ask him to make his own settlement of the matter. As Bai Qi drew the sword and prepared to cut his throat, he said, “What crime have I committed against Heaven that I should come to this?” Then after some time he said, “In fact I deserve to die. In the battle of Changping, when several hundred thousand soldiers of Zhao surrendered to me, I tricked them and had them buried alive. That is cause enough why I should die!” Then he committed suicide. Lord Wuan’s death took place in the eleventh month of the fiftieth year of King Zhaoxiang of Qin (257 BC). Since he died without having committed any crime, the people of Qin pitied him and all the hamlets and towns offered sacrifices to his spirit.

王翦者，频阳东乡人也。少而好兵，事秦始皇。始皇十一年,翦将攻赵阏与,破之，拔九城。十八年,翦将攻赵。岁余，遂拔赵，赵王降,尽定赵地为郡。明年,燕使荆轲为贼于秦,秦王使王翦攻燕。燕王喜走辽东，翦遂定燕蓟而还。秦使翦子王贲击荆，荆兵败。还击魏，魏王降，遂定魏地。
王翦是频阳东乡人，从小就喜欢兵法，是秦始皇手下的大将。始皇十一年，王翦领兵攻克了赵国的阏与，接着又一连夺得了九座城池。十八年，王翦又率兵伐赵，经过一年多，攻下了赵国的首都邯郸，赵王宣告投降，赵地被全部平定，成了秦国的郡县。第二年，燕国派荆轲入秦行刺，秦王大怒，派王翦立刻起兵攻燕。燕王喜逃到了辽东，燕国的首都蓟城一带被王翦全部平定。这时秦王又派了王翦的儿子王贲率兵攻楚，打败了楚兵后，又回兵攻魏，魏王宣告投降，魏国被全部平定。
Wang Jian was a native of East Hamlet in Pinyang in Qin. From his youth he was fond of military affairs and served the First Emperor of Qin. In the eleventh year of the First Emperor’s reign (236 BC), Wang Jian led an attack on the Zhao region of Eyu and conquered it, capturing nine cities. In the eighteenth year (229 BC) he led an attack on Zhao, and after a year or more succeeded in conquering it. The king of Zhao surrendered, and the entire territory of Zhao was taken over by Qin and made into provinces. The following year the state of Yan sent Jing Ke in an attempt to assassinate the Qin ruler. The king of Qin ordered Wang Jian to attack Yan. King Xi of Yan fled to Liaodong and Wang Jian gained control of the Yan capital of Ji before withdrawing. Qin ordered Wang Jian’s son Wang Ben to make a surprise attack on Jing. After defeating Jing’s forces, he returned and attacked Wei. The king of Wei surrendered and Qin took over the territory of Wei.

秦始皇既灭三晋,走燕王，而数破荆师。秦将李信者,年少壮勇，尝以兵数千逐燕太子丹至于衍水中，卒破得丹,始皇以为贤勇。于是始皇问李信：“吾欲攻取荆，于将军度用几何人而足?”李信曰：“不过用二十万人。”始皇问王翦，王翦曰：“非六十万人不可。”始皇曰：“王将军老矣，何怯也!李将军果势壮勇,其言是也。”遂使李信及蒙恬将二十万南伐荆。王翦言不用，因谢病，归老于频阳。李信攻平与,蒙恬攻寝,大破荆军。信又攻鄢、郢，破之,于是引兵而西，与蒙恬会城父。荆人因随之，三日三夜不顿舍,大破李信军，入两壁，杀七都尉，秦军走。
秦始皇消灭了韩、赵、魏三国，又赶走了燕王喜，又一连几次打败了楚国的军队。这时秦国的将领中有一个叫李信的，此人年轻勇敢，曾带领几千人到辽东的衍水捉来了燕太子丹，秦始皇很喜欢他的勇敢能干，于是始皇问李信说：“我想消灭楚国，你看得用多少人?”李信说：“顶多二十万。”始皇又问王翦，王翦说：“没有六十万人是不行的。”始皇说：“王将军大概是因为老了，不然为什么这么胆小呢?李将军确实勇敢，看来他的话是对的。”于是遂派李信和蒙恬领着二十万人前往伐楚。王翦则因为自己的意见不被采纳，于是就以有病为借口，回老家频阳休养去了。再说那边，李信率军攻平与，蒙恬率军攻寝丘，都打败了楚军。接着李信又攻破了鄢、郢，而后引兵西下，准备去城父与蒙恬会师。这时楚军尾随在后，一口气不休息地追了三天三夜，最后大破李信军，攻入了李信的两座大营，杀死了他的七个都尉，打得秦军大败而回。
By this time the First Emperor of Qin had wiped out Hann, Wei, Zhao, the Three Jin, had put the king of Yan to rout, and had several times defeated the Jing armies. Li Xin, a Qin general noted for his youth and daring, had in the past led a force of several thousand men in pursuit of Dan, the heir apparent of the state of Yan, advancing as far as the Yan River and defeating and capturing Dan. The First Emperor, admiring Li Xin’s worth and bravery, questioned him, saying, “I want to attack and take control of Jing. In your estimation, how many men will it take to do so?” “Not more than 200,000,” replied Li Xin. The First Emperor then questioned Wang Jian, and Wang Jian said, “You cannot do with less than 600,000 men.” “You are getting old, General Wang!” said the emperor. “Why so timorous? General Li, now, has his youth and daring to rely on! I’ll go by his word.” In the end he ordered Li Xin and Meng Tian to lead a force of 200,000 men south in an expedition against Jing. Since Wang Jian’s advice had not been heeded, he asked to be excused from service on grounds of illness and retired to Pinyang to spend his old age. Li Xin attacked Pingyu, Meng Tian attacked Qin, and they dealt a crushing blow to the Jing army. Li Xin also attacked the cities of Yan and Ying and captured them. Then he led his forces back west and joined Meng Tian at Chengfu. The men of Jing followed him, pushing ahead for three days and three nights without once stopping to rest, and inflicted a major defeat on Li Xin’s army, breaking through his fortifications at two points and killing seven commandants. The Qin army fled in confusion.

始皇闻之，大怒，自驰如频阳，见谢王翦曰：“寡人以不用将军计，李信果辱秦军。今闻荆兵日进而西，将军虽病，独忍弃寡人乎!”王翦谢曰：“老臣罢病悖乱,唯大王更择贤将。”始皇谢曰：“已矣，将军勿复言!"王翦曰：“大王必不得已用臣，非六十万人不可。”始皇曰：“为听将军计耳。”于是王翦将兵六十万人，始皇自送至灞上。王翦行，请美田宅园池甚众。始皇曰：“将军行矣，何忧贫乎?”王翦曰：“为大王将，有功终不得封侯,故及大王之向臣,臣亦及时以请园池为子孙业耳。”始皇大笑。王翦既至关,使使还请善田者五辈。或曰：“将军之乞贷，亦已甚矣。”王翦曰：“不然。夫秦王恒而不信人。今空秦国甲士而专委于我，我不多请田宅为子孙业以自坚,顾令秦王坐而疑我邪?”
秦始皇一听李信失败的消息，非常生气，立刻自己乘车赶到了频阳，向王翦道歉说：“我后悔当初没有采用您的意见，结果叫李信毁了我们的军队。现在楚兵正一天天地向西逼进，您尽管身体不好，但是能够忍心撇开我们不管吗?”王翦说：“我现在是又病又糊涂，干不了啦，大王还是另请高明吧!”秦始皇诚恳地说：“好了，将军不能再推辞了。”王翦说：“如果大王一定非要我去，那就还是非得六十万人不可!”秦始皇说：“一切都听您的。”于是王翦领着六十万人出发了，秦始皇亲自送他到灞上。王翦出发前一连向秦始皇要了许多好房子好地好园林。秦始皇说：“我看可以啦，难道今后您还担心受穷吗?”王翦说：“做大王的将领，即使立了功也不能封侯，所以还是及早趁着大王信任的时候，多为子孙后代要一点东西。”说得秦始皇哈哈大笑。从出咸阳到函谷关，这期间王翦又一连五次派人回去向秦始皇要好地。于是就有人劝道：“您这样无止无休地讨要，也太过分了!”王翦说：“不是这个意思。咱们这大王又粗暴又好怀疑人，现在他把全国的军队都交给了我，我要是不说为子孙向他要房子要地，那岂不让他担心、怀疑我吗?”
When the First Emperor heard of this he was enraged. He galloped in person to Pinyang and apologized to Wang Jian, saying, “I failed to listen to your counsel, General, and as a result Li Xin has brought disgrace on the Qin army. Now word has come that the Jing forces are advancing day by day. Though I know you are ill, I trust you will not be heartless enough to abandon me at a time like this!” But Wang Jian declined, saying, “I am old and infirm, hardly in my right senses any more. Your Majesty has only to select some other commander worthy of the post.” The emperor renewed his apologies, saying, “Please, General. No more talk of that kind.” Wang Jian said, “If Your Majesty is determined to employ me, then I must have 600,000 men — no less will do!” “Whatever you advise, General,” said the emperor. Wang Jian was accordingly put in command of a force of 600,000 men, and the emperor saw him off as far as the Ba River. As they were going on their way, Wang Jian requested the emperor for the gift of a great many fine fields and houses, gardens and ponds. The emperor said, “Just go on your way, General. Why all this worry over poverty?” Wang Jian replied, “Though many of Your Majesty’s generals have achieved merit, they have never succeeded in being enfeoffed as marquises. So while I enjoy Your Majesty’s favour, I want to use the opportunity to ask for fields and ponds for the sake of my sons and grandsons, that is all.” The emperor roared with laughter. By the time Wang Jian reached the Hangu Pass, he had five times sent messengers back to the capital to repeat his request for suitable farm lands. Someone said to him, “Aren’t you being a bit too persistent in the way you beg for rewards, General?” “Not at all,” replied Wang Jian. “The king of Qin is suspicious and puts no trust in others. Now he has emptied the state of Qin of all its armed men and turned them over to my sole authority. If I do not ask for a lot of fields and houses for the sake of my sons and grandsons and seem to be thinking only of my own interests, then I will just give him occasion to doubt my motives.”

王翦果代李信击荆。荆闻王翦益军而来，乃悉国中兵以拒秦。王翦至，坚壁而守之，不肯战。荆兵数出挑战，终不出。王翦日休士洗沐，而善饮食抚循之,亲与士卒同食。久之，王翦使人问军中戏乎?对曰：“方投石超距。”于是王翦曰：“士卒可用矣。”荆数挑战而秦不出，乃引而东。翦因举兵追之，令壮士击，大破荆军。至蕲南,杀其将军项燕,荆兵遂败走。秦因乘胜略定荆地城邑。岁余，虏荆王负刍,竟平荆地为郡县。因南征百越之君。而王翦子王贲，与李信破定燕、齐地。
于是王翦就去代替了李信，和楚国作战了。楚国听说王翦又带着更多的秦军来了，于是就发动了国家的全部力量来进行抵抗。王翦与楚军相遇后，只顾坚守工事，不与楚兵交战。楚军一连几次向秦军挑战，王翦始终不应。而秦军内部则是每天都让大家休息、洗澡、好吃、好喝，王翦本人也和士兵们一同进餐，就这样一直过了好久。有一天王翦派人到下面去看看士兵们在做什么游戏，去的人回来说：“正在扔石头，跳远。”王翦说：“这些士兵可以投入战斗了。”再说楚国人，他们经过多次挑战，而秦军死活不应，于是就领着这支军队向东方转移了。王翦一看立即发兵追赶，同时选派了军中的一部分勇士首先冲入了敌阵，结果楚军大败。接着王翦又乘胜追到了蕲县城南，杀死了楚国的名将项燕，打得楚军望风而逃。王翦则趁着胜利形势继续平定楚国的地盘，一年后，活捉了楚王负刍，把整个楚国都变成了秦国的郡县。接着又挥兵南下讨伐南方的少数民族。这时王翦的儿子王贲，也和李信一道平定了燕国和齐国。
Thus Wang Jian in the end replaced Li Xin as leader of the attack on Jing. When the king of Jing heard that Wang Jian was on his way with a greatly augmented army, he called out all the soldiers in the country to repel the Qin forces. Arriving in Jing, Wang Jian proceeded to build strong fortifications and stay within them, unwilling to engage in battle. The Jing soldiers repeatedly challenged him to combat, but he would never emerge from his defences. Each day Wang Jian rested his soldiers, allowing them to bathe and wash their hair, and kept them content with good food and drink. He mingled with his men and ate the same food they did. After some time, he sent someone to ask what amusements they indulged in. “Stone-throwing and high-jumping” was the answer. With that Wang Jian said, “The men are now in shape for use.” Though Jing had repeatedly challenged the Qin troops to battle, they refused to come forth, and so the Jing troops began to withdraw and go back east. Wang Jian then called out all his men and went in pursuit, ordering the young men to lead the attack, and dealt a crushing blow to the Jing army. Advancing as far as the area south of the Qi River, he killed the Jing general Xiang Yan, and with this the Jing forces fled in defeat. Taking full advantage of the victory, the Qin army seized control of one after another of Jing’s cities and towns, and a year or so later captured the Jing king Fuchu. Thus Wang Jian put down all resistance in the region of Jing, which was made into provinces and districts, and then proceeded south to subjugate the rulers of the Hundred Yue tribes. Meanwhile Wang Jian’s son Wang Ben joined with Li Xin in defeating and gaining control of the states of Yan and Qi.

秦始皇二十六年，尽并天下,王氏、蒙氏功为多，名施于后世。秦二世之时,王翦及其子贲皆已死，而又灭蒙氏。陈胜之反秦,秦使王翦之孙王离击赵，围赵王及张耳巨鹿城。或曰：“王离，秦之名将也。今将强秦之兵，攻新造之赵,举之必矣。”客曰：“不然。夫为将三世者必败。必败者何也?必其所杀伐多矣，其后受其不祥。今王离已三世将矣。”居无何,项羽救赵，击秦军，果虏王离,王离军遂降诸侯。
秦始皇二十六年，天下统一，在秦国统一天下的过程中，王翦父子和蒙恬兄弟的功劳最大，所以他们的名声一直留传于后代。到秦二世的时候，王翦和他的儿子王贵都已经死了，秦二世又灭掉了蒙氏一家。到陈胜起兵反秦时，秦二世派王翦的孙子王离去打赵国，把赵王歇和张耳围在了巨鹿城内。当时一般人都说：“王离是秦朝的名将，又领着一支强大的秦兵，去攻打一个刚刚建立的赵国，那是肯定能够取胜的。”可是也有人不这么看，他说：“不一定。凡是世袭为将的，到了第三代就肯定要失败。为什么呢?因为他们的先辈杀人太多了，他的后代就要承担这种坏报应。现在的王离，就已经是王家的第三代为将了。”没有多久，项羽率兵救赵，果然打败了秦军，俘虏了王离，王离的军队也都投降了项羽。
By the twenty-sixth year of his reign (221 BC), the First Emperor had united the entire realm under his rule. The Wang and Meng families achieved the greatest merit in this process, and their fame has been handed down to later ages. By the time of the Second Emperor, both Wang Jian and his son Wang Ben were dead, and the Meng family had been wiped out. When Chen She began his revolt against the Qin, the Qin dispatched Wang Li, the grandson of Wang Jian, to attack and besiege the king of Zhao and Zhang Er in the city of Julu. Someone said, “Wang Li is a renowned general of Qin. Now if he leads the powerful forces of Qin in an attack on the newly re-established state of Zhao, he is certain to crush it!” “Not so!” said one of the man’s retainers. “Any family that acts as generals for three generations will surely meet with defeat. Why? Because the earlier members inevitably will have attacked and killed many people, and those who come after will suffer the bad luck that results. And Wang Li’s family have been generals now for three generations!” Not long after, Xiang Yu came to Zhao’s rescue, launching an attack on the Qin army. As the retainer had predicted, Wang Li was taken prisoner and his army surrendered to the feudal leaders.

太史公曰：鄙语云:“尺有所短，寸有所长。”白起料敌合变,出奇无穷，声震天下，然不能救患于应侯。王翦为秦将，夷六国,当是时，翦为宿将,始皇师之,然不能辅秦建德，固其根本，偷合取容，以至场身。及孙王离为项羽所虏，不亦宜乎!彼各有所短也。
太史公说：俗话说：“尺有所短，寸有所长。”白起分析敌情，掌握变化，出奇制胜，天下无敌，可是却逃不脱范雎对他的陷害。王翦为秦朝灭掉了六国，成为当时的名将，连秦始皇都要向他请教，但是他却不能帮着秦国实行德政，稳定国家的根本，而只是苟且随和，一直到死。等传到他的孙子王离时，就被项羽活捉了，这难道不是活该吗!他们也的确是各有所短哪!
The Grand Historian remarks: The proverb says, “There’s something short about a foot, and something long about an inch”. Bai Qi gauged the enemy, adapted to the shifts of circumstance, and came up with an inexhaustible supply of strategies, until his name made the whole world tremble. Yet he could not save himself from his troubles with the marquis of Ying. As a general of the Qin, Wang Jian brought the Six States under Qin rule. At that time he was a veteran military leader and enjoyed the esteem of the First Emperor. Yet he was unable to aid the Qin in establishing virtue so as to make firm the roots of its power, but instead sought only to accommodate himself to the situation, to do what was acceptable, and so to live out his days. Was it not right, then, that his grandson Wang Li fell captive to Xiang Yu? Both men had “something short” about them.